Hello everyone and welcome to the implementation of Mirch sort lecture.
So again as a brief overview Mirch sort is a recursive algorithm that continually splits a list and
half list or array.
If that list is empty or has one item by definition it's already sorted.
That's your base case.
If the list has more than one item we are in a split that list recursively and invoke a merge sort on
both halves.
Once the two halves are sorted the fundamental operation called the merge is performed that merging
is the process of taking two smaller sorted lists and then combining them together into a single sorted
needed list.
So here I am at the implementation of a merge sort notebook which is under sorting and searching folder
.
Use your resources for review and then here's the actual function we're going to implement and explain
as we go along.
So let's go ahead and implement it.
Make sure it works and then break it down line by line.
So I'm going go ahead and hop over to a Jupiter note book here and I'm going to go ahead and start typing
out.
So first thing we're going to do is just say the earth merge underscores sorts and we're going to go
ahead and pass in an array or a list.
Same thing as we've discussed before and I'm going to say if length of this python lists which are treating
as an array is greater than one that I'm going to have some code out here so I'm going to say mid as
a variable.
So if we already have a length that's more than one we know we're dealing Philos. so as to that middle
of that list that M-ID mid done with the length of that array divided by two and then I'm going to create
two Hafs the left half of that array and the right.
So when I say left half as equal to Array.
I'm going to use some slicing here and to say left half is everything to the middle and then the right
half
is from the middle onwards.
All right so we're using that M-ID that variable as a midpoint so we can split that array.
And here we're actually going to do a recursive call I'm going to say merge sorts
on the left half and then I'm going to call immerged sorts on the right half.
And I'm just using tabbed to autocomplete does variables which is why they're popping up so quickly
.
All right so then we're going to go ahead and make basically some index variables as counters something
to say equals zero.
Jake will zero and cake zero right.
And there were essentially going to have three wild loops here.
One to check basically that midpoint and then another one the left and right half.
So let's go ahead and program these out.
So I'll say why while I is less than the length of the left half
and J is less than the length of the right half what we're going to do is say if the left half at that
index is less than the right half of that index of J
then we're going to say theory at the K index that value is equal to left half of I and then we're just
going to say it equals what I was plus 1 and then it's going zoom in on this loop here.
Then I say else
the array value at that index k is equal to the right half J.
Then we're going to add evaluates J-Rich going to say J was J plus 1.
And then outside of that we're just going to say play plus 1.
And just as a reminder this is the same thing as saying cake will k plus 1.
OK.
So that's our first while loop and something to note here is that these additional y loops are really
just operating from merging to smaller sorted lists into a larger sorted list.
So notice that the merge operation places the items back into the original list which in this case is
a r r for us.
So it replaces them placing the items back to that original list.
Or are that array one at a time by repeatedly taking the smallest item from the sorted list.
OK so let's go ahead and continue on with the rest of the code we need for actually merging these two
sorted lists.
So as far as the actual sorting that's happening here at the recursive call we have two more wireless
for continuing this merging of these two sort of sublists.
And these have to do with the left and right half.
So we're just going to say while it is less than the length of the left half then our value k is just
equal to left have value.
I just say it counts to those index markers
and then we're going to the same similar thing for the White House.
So then while J is less than the length of the right half that value at K is equal to right half J.
And then similarly we're just going to say James 1 J plus equals 1 in the cake Wil's plus one there
.
OK.
So I know that's actually quite a bit of code that we just did.
So before we break it down line by line we're just going to go and make sure it actually worked out
for us so let's go ahead and make an array.
Some random numbers that are unsorted.
OK.
And then let's call merge sort's on that array and then check the array.
OK great.
Looks like it worked.
It looks like it was all sorted.
So now let's go back again and check this out line by line.
Really make sure we understand what's going on here for the merge sort.
And we remember that it's basically a recursive call on the sorting algorithm.
So first off we basically have in the base case right and we're checking here and doing the recursive
calls.
So we're saying that the length the array is still greater than 1 which means we haven't reached that
base case of just one element in that list.
We calculate the mid and then split that list into left and right halfs and then we call merge or a
left half and right half.
So you can imagine you keep calling this recursive algorithm if you remember back to the figures of
the previous lecture you keep splitting that list in half.
All right.
And then once those two halves are sorted we basically have that fundamental operation called emerge
and the merging it's just a process taking those two smaller sorted lists and combining them together
into a single sorted new list.
So we basically have three different index trackers where the K index tracker is going to relate to
our final array and then the tracker is for the left half and the J trackers for that right half.
So each three of these wild calls here is just to make sure that the index is actually still within
the left and right half of the list which is why they're just less than calls.
So we have our eye index for that left hand.
And here we're just checking.
OK.
Are we still in that left half and then J.
Just checking.
We're still in that right half.
So then we're just checking at that particular index of I and J as we continue on because remember we're
adding them essentially equally for any if or else cases we're saying which ones less than or greater
then.
So if it's less than that we just set the value at that current K equal to the left half and then we
add.
So the value there once was on that we go ahead and add to the K value.
If this wasn't the case then we actually set the value equal to the right hand and then add a 1 to the
right half index marker.
Then we have while I is less in line to the left half we continue on a similar process at I plus 1 K
plus 1 and then the similar thing for right half if it's still inside right half.
Go ahead and set that current value where I have J J plus 1 Caple sequel's one is constantly adding
counts and making sure you're still in that left half right half markers.
So these three while loops are just doing the actual merging of the sort it's sublists so licious break
down this code one more time as a complete whole picture I'm kind of zoomed out a bit.
But basically what we have here is our merge sort function.
It begins by asking that base case question if the length of the list is less than or equal to 1 then
we've actually already have a sorted list.
And no more processing is necessary.
If on the other hand the length is greater than one then we use the python slice operation.
So we're doing here to extract the left and the right Hafs which is this variable and this variable
and it's important to note that the list may not have an even number of items that actually doesn't
matter as the lengths will differ by at most one.
It's an odd number of elements.
So then once that merge sort function is invoked on the left half and the right half these two lines
here it's assumed that they are sorted.
And what's actually happening for the rest of the function the rest of these lines they're responsible
for merging the two smaller sorted lists into a larger sorted list.
So notice that that merge operation place the items back to the original list.
So we're actually placing them back into our original array that we took in here at the top.
So it's placing them back one at a time but just repeatedly taking the smallest item from the sorted
list.
So you notice here we're always checking for the smallest item when we're doing these merging operations
.
So one more useful tip as far as really understanding what's going on is definitely adding print statements
So you could even just say here in line with that if we go ahead and go back we can actually just say
prints and we can say merging
and then let's go ahead and say just that array.
Let's make sure that primes or works and we can see the actual arrays remerging.
So this is a really nice visualization and hopefully you can see how it matches up with that original
diagram that we saw in the last lecture.
So remerging 11 and 2.
So these guys have already been immersed sorted all the way until they only have one element left in
their index.
Let's zoom in a little more so you can really see this.
So remerging 11:2 We're checking which one is less.
And now we have a sorted.
Now we're going to the right half taking five and four.
Merging them and sorting them and then we're going to go ahead and merge these two guys.
So now we have them sorted and you can see how we have the recursive calls on these arrays or these
sublists and you can see how we're combining them and merge them.
So go ahead and walk through this.
What I would recommend is that you actually replace the Saray with the same array we used in the previous
diagram.
So you can actually match up your code to the diagrams and figures we saw in the last lecture.
OK.
So that's it for the merge sort.
Probably the most tricky or confusing part is making sure the merging itself is actually checking correctly
on these three while loops but the actual idea of it and the recursive call should be pretty simple
and straightforward especially if you do then the recursion section this sort of method of sorting just
kind of makes sense would keep splitting that list in half more and more and more and then just slowly
sort them and merge them as you go back up.
OK.
That's it for the merge sort.
You can go in and check out the Jupiter notebook in case you want more resource for review more explanations
and check out the previous lecture if you want the actual diagrams.
All right thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture